truth as we know is a tricky business do
you think there are differences in the
truth claims between different writers
of
fiction like is Doki more profound than
no well I wouldn't call fiction truth
claims anyway I mean he's a then on what
grounds do we rank order the the fiction
in terms of quality like doeski is a
profound purveyor of fiction on the
philosophical front unbelievably deep
and profound there's something true
about what he's writing about it's it's
nothing to do with the truth the truth
that science is concerned with the truth
of science is the truth that gets us to
the Moon I mean this is nothing to do
with um whether one writer of fiction
has a sort of insight into human nature
that that goes without saying I accept
that okay so how do we deal with the
notion that on the on the purely factual
side how do we deal with the idea let's
take the no you you talked about
clitoridectomy let's talk about the
oppression of women yes we make a
scientific case that that's
inappropriate or is it the case that
we're making on some other grounds like
I see in the judeo-christian tradition
one of the earliest pronouncement is
that both men and women carry the image
of God both and that sets a certain tone
to everything that follows and it is a
remarkable Proclamation given its
radical age that both men and women are
carry the carry the image of God and are
to be treated as something with
intrinsic value outside of the domain of
power and politics politics and it isn't
obvious me it isn't obvious to me having
thought about this a lot how we deal
with that in the pure realm of fact
because one of the facts is if I can
oppress you why the hell shouldn't I
yeah my job is to keep things on track
here I think there are a number of
questions which Professor Dawkins has
asked quite directly that we still
haven't really heard an answer for okay
okay and Professor Dawkin asking about
the Virgin birth you started talking
about metaphor you started talking about
myth I think anybody listening to this
conversation will understand that maybe
a society that doesn't believe in the
Virgin birth won't work maybe that's the
predictive power that you're talking
about but I I think you must understand
that when Professor Dawkin is asking you
do you believe that Jesus was born of a
virgin he means something like a
biological fact and and by the way
saying I don't know or saying you know
I'm not qualified to
comment is an answer to that question
but is that your answer that you that
you don't know I said earlier and and I
I would hold to this is that there are
elements of the text that I don't know
how
to that I'm incapable of fully
accounting for I can't account for for
what the what the fundamental reality
and significance of the notion of the
Resurrection is my my knowledge just
ends sure but I know that whatever
happened whatever happened as a
consequence of the origination and the
promotion of the Christian story was
powerful enough to bring Rome to its
knees and demolish the Pagan Enterprise
so there's some power in that story
that's remarkable let's stick to the
Virgin birth and well the the Virgin
birth results from a mistranslation of
Isaiah you know that I'm like these
sorts of
questions it's po what would you say
they don't they don't strike me
as they're not getting to the point has
a purpose well and look I understand
that there's there's perfect reasons to
debate this I I know that and I know
that your question is more than valid
but it's beside the issue as far as I'm
concerned and and it's it's partly
because
well when we started this conversation I
said for example that it it appears to
be the case that a description of the
structure through which we see the world
is a
story we see the world through a story
and so that's a remarkable thing that's
a remarkable Discovery and it's emerged
probably in the last 16 year 60 years in
multiple disciplines because we have to
prioritize our facts and so we
prioritize them according to a
particular pattern and there are
patterns that seem to work and to
propagate themselves properly and to
orient cultures towards life abundant
and there are other patterns the pattern
of Cain for example that lead to
Absolute bloody Devastation and I don't
know exactly how to construe that sort
of truth but we talked about the
oppression of women for example it's
like how do you make a case on Purely
factual grounds that women should be
treated as
equals it's a moral question and I know
that's ex exactly I I was dealing with a
vual question which is did Jesus have a
father and and you won't answer it Jes
father and a Heavenly Father like almost
all mythological Heroes so he wasn't the
born of a virgin then so you so you're
saying that Jesus was not born of a
virgin I I said first of all that I
don't I don't know how to mediate the
fact value dichotomy in that case I said
the same thing about the resurrection
it's not a value it's it's a simple fact
I mean did did did a man have
intercourse with with Mary and produce
Jesus that's that's a factual question
it's not a value
question you must understand what you're
being asked here that that even if you
think that say the author of the
biblical texts intended much more
significance than a simple scientific
analysis of events Professor Dawkins is
interested in scientific truth that's
the kind of truth that he's interested
in and even if you think it's irrelevant
to the point of what the the gospel
authors were getting at that first needs
to be clarified before you can then
begin actually uncovering what the stor
is are about so I think Professor
Dawkins is asking from a scientific
perspective and maybe you think that
that scientific approach is wrong but if
you just take it for a moment maybe this
is how we find out that it is wrong
let's take a scientific approach ask the
question did this occur I think that
it's inappropriate to use a question
like that to attempt to under undermine
the validity of the entire what would
you say deep mythological Enterprise we
weren't doing that suppose we were
asking out of Interest suppose that we
were all here devout Christians maybe
even yian Christians and we thought this
is interesting over dinner do you think
it really happened like scientifically
would your answer just be I don't know
yes and you wouldn't consider it I mean
it's not an inappropriate question to
ask just on a point of Interest right
did this really occur and I think so
often people are asking you that and and
especially given the context of this
conversation we've we've heard
everything that you're you're saying
about metaphor and myth and but because
the question is still then being asked
did it really happen you know that
that's what you're being asked and the
way just so easily said yes I wonder why
you struggle to do that in so many other
circumstances I think because I don't
look at the situation the same the the
way that Dr Dawkins and I look at the
situation are really quite different and
at many many many levels you know so
even on the meme question for example
you know like I know the literature on
the history of religious ideas I see how
these ideas have battled across
Millennia in a manner that is very
reminiscent to me of the same sort of
claim that Dr Dawkins is putting forward
with regards to meme I know that
literature Dr Dawkins doesn't know that
literature and it's very difficult for
me to communicate from within the
confines of that literature because it's
extensive and deep and and we're dealing
with things that we don't understand the
relationship between metaphoric truth
and value predicated truth and factual
truth we don't understand that it's a
big problem we cannot there's no
evidence whatsoever from the scientific
perspective that we can Orient oursel in
the world merely in consequence of the
facts and that's a fact and it's a fact
that's been detailed out in great detail
in the last 60 years by people from a
variety of different disciplines we have
to prioritize the facts that's a value
hierarchy there may be true and false
ways of prioritizing facts but you can't
determine the truth or falsehood of the
way that you prioritize facts by making
reference to the facts that's a big
problem okay let's let's let's talk
about that as perhap perap a slight
detour here because I think we do need
to come back to this Christ Resurrection
thing but Professor Dawkins would you
say that underlying the scientif
scientific Enterprise is a fundamentally
unscientific assumption you can you can
make scientific investigations in the
world but in order to do so you need to
choose what to prioritize you need to
choose what to investigate you also need
to um value the truth you need to have a
value and a motivation for doing it in
the first place those kinds of things
cannots
be scientifically Justified and so does
the scient scientific Enterprise have an
unscientific assumption at its base I
suppose it does I mean I I I think we I
think that maybe just be Jordan and
Richard but by the way um um I think
that Jordan prioritizes myth and I
prioritize fact and
um I think myth is kind of vaguely
interesting but it's not the be on end
or of my life I think it's it's somewhat
secondary to scientific fact sort of
facts that that tell us how old the
universe is how old the world is um the
history of Life the um engineering
achievements of Landing a a a spacecraft
on on a comet the these are the things
that science can do and as I said the
predictions of quantum theory to come
back to that but predictions of quantum
theory which are verified to a
sufficient number of decimal places that
it's equivalent to predicting the width
of North America to one hairs breadth
now that is however difficult quantum
theory is to understand that is what you
can get from quantum theory now the
mysteries of the Bible if they are
Mysteries aren't in the same league I
mean they they just don't cut
it America's Healthcare System is
lacking in any real care insurance
companies regularly deny Progressive
treatment options primary care
physicians refuse to order comprehensive
lab work and the standards of care lag
years behind the leading research that's
where meric health comes in mer Health
represents a paradigm shift in how we
approach medicine the Premier Health
optimization platform mer Health
empowers you to maximize your longevity
and performance with the confidence that
comes from having experts in your back
pocket they offer Cutting Edge
diagnostic Labs concierge Health
coaching and expert clinical oversight
they help you achieve your health and
fitness goal goals by leveraging
datadriven lifestyle and nutrition
recommendations along with supplement
and prescription treatment options if
you're listening to this show then
you're probably a proponent of taking
your health into your own hands that's
why we've teamed up with mer Health to
offer a turnkey optimization package
designed for those who want to maximize
their performance and Longevity with the
most elaborate testing on the market
you'll receive extensive lab work
thorough lab reports video calls with
Merck's Health experts and expedited
onboarding go to mer health.com Peterson
and use code Peterson to get the same
panel and medical oversight I get and
save 10% at checkout that's mer
health.com Peterson and use code
Peterson at
checkout see that that well okay so let
let me let me respond to that so one of
the things that I've tried to study is
the preconditions for the scientific
Enterprise
itself you you appeared to agree with
Alex that there might be um
presumptions axioms that need to be
accepted I don't want to put words in
your mouth because I want to get this
right before the Scientific Enterprise
can begin so I've tried to think those
truths let me lay out a couple of them
this is partly what I've done while
trying to make the case for example that
you're more of a Christian than you
think you are so for example I think
that the scient scientific Enterprise is
motivated by the axima presumption that
truth tends towards a Unity I think that
it's predicated on the not notion that
there is a logical order that's
intrinsic to the cosmos that that
fundamental order is good that it's
intelligible to human beings and
that discovering that order and aligning
oursel with it makes for life more
abundant I think that the scientific
Enterprise is also predicated on the
idea that the truth will set you free
and I think all of those axioms are
religious and derived from the
judeo-christian tradition and if you
don't believe that you have to account
for why science emerged in Europe and
nowhere else in the entire history of
humanity for example and why it's also
why it's under assault from like all
quarters now as that underlying
metaphysic disappears like you don't
have you haven't had to be concerned
with the mythological substrate in your
lifetime in some sense because it was
intact and so the universities could
flourish and you had your freedom
remarkable freedom to pursue your
scientific Enterprise wherever you
wanted and people Ed you for it like
that time is that time is threatened and
seriously so and I think it's partly
because these metaphysical assumptions
have now become questionable and that's
part of the reason that I'm attending to
them it's not because I don't admire the
accuracy of quantum prediction for
example or celebrate what musk is doing
with his capability of sending Rockets
to Mars it's like more power to the
technological Enterprise but you know
what's happening in the universities
it's awful and that's that's not a
scientific problem it's under okay I
agree about that okay okay
[Music]